you you weren't tempted last week when
we talked about the possibility of you
starting a whole new life in cambodia
did that know
it's a tremendous sacrifice and when i
say that these things change who you are
it's not
entirely free you're closing a whole lot
of doors to open that one door
i'm more curious this is like i've been
wanting to just kind of move into a
different topic
segwaying if you will i'm curious to
know
okay so i only speak english i don't
even speak high school level french it's
terrible
yeah you speak multiple languages or
you've at least
[Music]
learned languages sounds like some of
them you haven't kept up with whatever
i'm curious as somebody who is clearly
who clearly prioritizes learning
languages
um i don't know a lot about that from
personal experience like i'm not driven
i don't want to like i feel like it's a
very it's like learning math for me i
just don't want to look at it
another language and i think for
somebody who doesn't really look at
languages too much or hasn't learned
multiple languages the assumption is
kind of like
that the main reason to learn a language
is simply so that you can communicate
to people who speak that language but my
vague understanding
is that beyond just being able to
translate words from english to whatever
you're learning
that you actually can pick up stuff from
learning another language like it's not
just this word means this
there's actual like interesting things
you can learn about a culture or just
about psychology or whatever
from hearing or understanding how
another language works
is that accurate and if so like can you
tell me about that a bit like is there
is there lessons you get from languages
that you kind of can't get anywhere else
that aren't just sort of
this word means this the short answer is
yes
but the long answer is i'm very very
careful not to
romanticize this aspect of language
learning and there were a lot of people
on the internet a lot of people
publishing books and a lot of people
working in universities
who really do try to romanticize
language learning
so i have at least one youtube video
where the title is this is from memory
like learn as few languages as possible
like that's either the title of the
section where i warn people
like don't don't think you can learn
like eight languages without
really [ __ ] up your life and kind of
damaging your psychology
it's a big deal uh it screws you up
frankly it feels like brain damage
and i have a lot of regrets about about
language learning and i'm very honest
about that because i don't want other
people to make those
those mistakes and i really caution
people against
overly ambitious overly adventurous
approaches to learning a language
there is no shortcut when it comes to
learning languages
none and you know what else it's not
rewarding in the way that people think
it is or the way that people say it is
i don't read as much as i used to
because i'm busy learning languages
sorry i got books here
i i don't know when i'm gonna find time
to read this but i'd love to do a book
review
on this channel but if i'm okay so this
is these are both related to china
so i can't read this book about politics
and history of china
because i'm going to be busy memorizing
incredibly simple sentences out of this
book doing language
language learning language rote
memorization language practice so on and
so forth
so there's there's a really simple
direct sense
in which language learning makes your
life worse
makes your life less meaningful makes
your life
less rewarding and you know i mean on
the other hand
i'm spoiled i've studied so many
languages for so many years
i am accustomed to getting off an
airplane and being able to speak
enough french i'm get off the airplane
in germany this even happened we should
switch planes in germany
and speak enough german now within asia
speaking chinese speaking thai probably
if i had to i could go back to speaking
enough japanese not not easily
you know the places i've been flying in
and out of i am
really accustomed to saying part of me
thank you how much does this cost
knowing the numbers
even if it's just that level of
interaction what buying gross able to do
it
and here i am now in athens greece
and you know i feel ashamed i feel
ashamed that i don't speak enough this
language
already instantly to be able to ask
people how much does this cost part of
me sorry excuse me
whatever those kinds of interactions
from the day i got off the plane and you
know what
you know what i own the books so i
i have the temptation to think over now
how much time do i want to put into
reading these books
but again language study it competes
with
studying the philosophy the history the
politics things that are really more
meaningful and
more rewarding if i spend the time
doing rote memorization on greek
vocabulary greek sentence structure
greek grammar
that's time when i'm not even reading
the greek newspaper
let alone the philosophy of aristotle or
you know uh
whatever so you asked about the positive
side
and i'm only talking about the negative
side so far i have to talk about both
in terms of the positive side let me say
this there is absolutely no way
you can pick up a political pamphlet
published in communist china
and appreciate what it means in english
translation
all right just very simple example and
by the same token like today if you
picked up one of the pamphlets
for donald trump and translated into
chinese
like did google translate china's trend
hand it to a chinese person
there would be so much there they're not
getting and not
understanding when you're talking about
the politics of cambodia
the politics of laos you know some of
what's going on politically comes from a
marxist and communist heritage
some of it comes from an ancient
buddhist heritage
some of it comes from a french empire
european colonialist heritage
there's a lot there right there's a lot
to appreciate
now you know for someone like me
that may powerfully motivate you to wake
up in the morning
and study an obscure language like
lotion
along with the potential to really make
a positive difference in the world
in brief through humanitarian work
through
research you know i i had different
different reasons to do this
with that having been said very often
the price is
too high to pay i'm left with a lot of
regrets in my life
and i really do feel like it's brain
damage i've lost a lot of my
intellectual potential and a lot of
things i could have done with my life
learning lotion learning cambodian i
learned much less cambodian than lotion
incidentally but it was
very hard work very very tough language
to work on
what what i learned of cambodian came at
at a very high price
and you know i have to say also when i
slip
into speaking lotion which i still can
do it doesn't feel good
i mean it's really like ptsd it's really
awful
and i don't think on a biological level
that it is natural normal or good to
to be multilingual or or massively
multilingual to have many
languages acquired this way um
you know so just to very briefly
contrast you know something positive
you know when i was in laos i didn't
just study lotion i studied
the ancient language pali and i remember
riding up on my bicycle to a hospital
and the hospital had a long pretentious
name i like to do that in lotion
so lau it's a it's a monosyllabic
language it's like
many words are just one syllable long
but then they have these long words that
come from buddhist philosophy that are
polysyllabic and very very long
and you know i actually found an error
in the spelling of the hospital's name
and i was able to speak lotion enough
to go up and explain them hey you know
i'm a scholar of buddhist philosophy
and you know actually you have the wrong
consonant in the middle of this long
word
and i know today i completely forgot
what was the name of the hospital it was
probably like
you know the hospital of the sun shining
down
radiant kindness in order to help the
injured or something you know
pretentious uh you know needlessly
obstruct name for a hospital whatever
the hell it was called i forget
you know uh but it was it was a long
long word like this
you know okay you know if you study
languages like cree and ojibwe
you get to look at a map and understand
why
some of the places still name what
they're named you get to read the
legends
and the understand the culture and there
are there are different things you can
learn there are ways in which
you can benefit but um it's a tremendous
sacrifice
and when i say that these things change
who you are it's not entirely for the
better
um in some ways studying languages
changes you for the worse
and uh each new language you take on
it's a it's a big big decision
um with with major ramifications and
consequences
so um people write to me asking for
advice about learning particular
languages
and i often i'm cautioning them look
like like let's say it's
let's say it's lotion okay go there for
two weeks first
think about this think about this really
make sure
you want to take this step because
there's also the opportunity cost
okay so you've decided to learn lotion
so you're never going to learn mongolian
you're never going to learn a
central turkic language such as was
spoken in uzbekistan
you're never going to go to egypt and be
able to
communicate with people in egyptian
arabic like you may not think you're
closing the door in a lot of things like
you are
you're closing a whole lot of doors to
open that one door
so are you sure you want to learn the
ocean are you sure you want to learn
cambodian chinese japanese whatever it
is and to
really take that seriously and when i
say it changes who you are
um keep in mind some of that stuff you
can't anticipate
you can't know how that's gonna change
you
and um and what i've just said right now
you can watch a hundred different
youtube channels from so-called
polyglots and language coaches
and people who say pay me to talk to me
on skype like there are a lot of people
making money
out of um making language education seem
fabulous and entertaining on the
internet
and i think none of them will be as
honest as i've just been and saying look
there's there's a dark side but this
this language learning game you got to
think about you got to think about the
cost
[Laughter]
you weren't tempted last week when we
talked about the possibility of you
starting a whole new life in cambodia
did that know not really
that's interesting that wasn't the
answer i was expecting that's
interesting